SIR, I was sentenced on the 11th day of February, 1909, at Volksrust to six months imprisonment with hard labour for having dared to assert my right as an old resident of the Transvaal to re enter. I finished my sentence on the 10th August last. I was deported the same day. I recrossed the border on the same day, and was sentenced to another term of six months on the 11th August last, and was discharged yesterday. I was removed from Volksrust to Houtpoort, and from Houtpoort to Diepkloof on the 7th October last. From Houtpoort to Johannesburg I was only handcuffed, but from Johannesburg to Diepkloof not only was I handcuffed but my leg, together with that of another fellow prisoner, was heavily ironed. At Volksrust and Houtpoort I was medically examined, and considered weak enough to receive an extra blanket and special foodthat is bread and milk. I am only 48 years, though the medical officers have taken me to be 55. At the first two gaols I was allowed, for religious reasons, to retain my sacred thread and my own cap, which I was permitted to wear, whether in the presence of the Governor and other officers, or at the time of taking meals. At Diepkloof, the next morning, the medical officer came to examine all the prisoners. There were several fellow passive resisters. The doctor started by saying to us, What the devil are you here for? One of us said, for conscience sake. The medical officer retorted, Your conscience be damned. He then ordered that we should all be at the same time entirely undressed. This was objected to. For an Indian this is a very painful ordeal, but, as we feared violence, we all did as we were told. When my turn came to be examined, I reported that I was put upon the sick list at both Volksrust and Houtpoort, and that I had special food allowed, but the medical officer simply said, There is nothing the matter with you. You are too fat. I had only ordinary food allowed, but an extra blanket had been allowed to me the previous evening by the head warder. I was immediately given hard work in the shape of stone breaking. I was not allowed to rest at all, and was expected to keep the hammer going continuously. The third day the work proved too much for me, and I complained, but the warder in charge said that he could do nothing, that I had to report myself as sick, but that, until he received other instructions, he was bound to see to it that I did my work without interruption. I, therefore, continued it, and several times fit as if I were finished. Subsequently, I was examined by the doctor, who told me that there was a little soreness in my sides owing to the work, but that there was nothing in it, and that I would be all right when I had thrown off superfluous fat. I had to continue the work, which resulted in my health becoming worse. I reported again to the Governor, who ordered a re examination, but that resulted in my being deprived even of the extra blanket that had been allowed, the doctor remarking that I had simply to work harder to become all right. This state of things continued for nearly a fortnight, I becoming